# COSC3765 Homework 6: Final Project Proposal

Noah Mulvaney  
28 March 2024

For my final project, I propose implementing the Data Encryption Standard (DES) from scratch in a low-level language, C/C++, based on the Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 46-2 Data Encryption Standard [(FIPS 46)](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/FIPS/fipspub46-2.pdf). I will use its included algorithm specification to write a pair of programs capable of encrypting and decrypting an arbitrary length of plaintext using a 64-bit symmetric key. This includes implementing both the cipher function, key schedule, overall encryption structure, and a rudimentary ability to divide data into 64-bit blocks with appropriate padding.

I will begin by implementing what FIPS 46 describes as primitive functions, including a selection and a permutation function. Additionally, I will program a key schedule to derive partial keys from the 64-bit key. I will then be able to construct the cipher function, which acts on half the in-process data and partial key at each of 16 rounds. This function expands the 32-bit data, adds (modulo 2 or XOR) the partial key, applies a selection function (which reduces a 6-bit block to 4 bits), and applies the permutation function to produce the cipher function output. The output of the cipher function combined with the other half of in-process data results in half of the in-process data for the next round. Additionally, an initial permutation and concluding inverse permutation could be implemented.

I will begin my implementing both encryption and decryption for a 64-bit block using a 64-bit key. I can then extend my program by allowing for arbitrary length plaintext, with functions to divide and pad data as appropriate. My goal is not to exactly reproduce a professional or secure implementation (which is far beyond my ability), but to explore the actual concepts behind symmetric encryption algorithms, as well as gain experience working with technical specifications. Depending on the difficulty of the project, I may also include a high-level summary of the security issues of DES with my demonstration as part of my final presentation or may attempt to expand the mode options available in my program. I am at this point not confident about the ease or difficulty of this project.

While DES is regarded as deprecated [(RFC 4772)](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4772), I believe this project will allow me to expand and demonstrate my understanding of cryptography more generally. This will contribute to my understanding of computer security and computer science more broadly.